# Installation {#installation}

In the steps below we show how one can download Reaktoro, build, and install it in Linux and MacOS systems. Note that compiling Reaktoro can take some time. This is because it heavily relies on template metaprogramming for efficient vector and matrix calculations, as well as for calculation of partial derivatives of most thermodynamic properties, such as activity coefficients, phase molar volumes, standard Gibbs energies, etc. In addition, it will also compile several third-party libraries, such as [CVODE](https://computation.llnl.gov/casc/sundials/description/description.html#descr_cvode) for efficient solution of ordinary differential equations (ODE), and the geochemical codes [PHREEQC](http://wwwbrr.cr.usgs.gov/projects/GWC_coupled/phreeqc/) and [GEMS](http://gems.web.psi.ch/). Compilation of the Python wrappers can also take several minutes, as [Boost.Python] too relies on template metaprogramming.

# Downloading the source code {#downloading-the-source-code}
Reaktoro's source code is kept in a [Bitbucket repository](https://bitbucket.org/reaktoro/reaktoro). If you have `git` installed in your system, then downloading this repository is as easy as running the following command in a terminal:

~~~{.txt}
git clone https://bitbucket.org/reaktoro/reaktoro.git Reaktoro
~~~

Alternatively, you can access this [link](https://bitbucket.org/reaktoro/reaktoro/get/master.zip) to directly download Reaktoro source code as a zipped file. If you choose this option, unzip the file before proceeding to the next step.

# Installing the dependencies {#installing-the-dependencies}
Reaktoro has a few dependencies that need to be installed before it can be built. If you plan to compile only its C++ libraries, all you will need is [CMake](https://cmake.org/), which is used for managing and automating the whole build process, including the installation of third party libraries. The table below describes how to install CMake from the terminal in some Linux distributions:

| OS | Command
|----|---------
| Ubuntu | `sudo apt-get install cmake`
| Fedora | `sudo yum install cmake`
| Arch Linux | `pacman -Ss cmake`

Optionally, you might want to install [Gnuplot](http://www.gnuplot.info/) if you intend to do real-time plotting of the chemical calculations.

| OS | Command
|----|---------
| Ubuntu | `sudo apt-get install gnuplot5 gnuplot5-qt`
| Fedora | `sudo yum install gnuplot gnuplot-qt`
| Arch Linux | `pacman -Ss gnuplot`

Check if a plot is successfuly output to a window terminal by issuing the command:

~~~{.txt}
gnuplot -persist -e 'plot sin(x)'
~~~

If a window did not show up with an interactive plot, you might need to install a different package other than `gnuplot-qt`. Check your distribution, or install Gnuplot from source.

If you plan to use Reaktoro from Python, then a few more dependencies are needed to compile the Python wrappers of Reaktoro's C++ classes and methods. If you just want the C++ libraries, you can skip this and go to the [next section](#compiling-the-cpp-library).

[Boost.Python] is used to generate the Python wrappers for the C++ Reaktoro's interface. Thus, install [Boost](http://www.boost.org/) as follows:

| OS | Command
|----|---------
| Ubuntu | `sudo apt-get install libboost-python-dev`
| Fedora | `sudo yum install boost boost-devel`
| Arch Linux | `pacman -Ss boost boost-libs py++`

You will also need to install [Python](https://www.python.org/) libraries and some Python packages such as [Numpy](http://www.numpy.org/). Because [Boost.Python] in most Linux systems has been compiled using Python 2.x, and not Python 3.x, we need to install Python 2.x packages:

| OS | Command
|----|---------
| Ubuntu | `sudo apt-get install python python-dev python-numpy python-pip`
| Fedora | `sudo yum install boost boost-devel python-numpy`
| Arch Linux | `pacman -Ss python2 python2-numpy`

In addition, if you also plan on building Reaktoro interpreter application, then install the following additional Python packages: 

| OS | Command
|----|---------
| Ubuntu | `sudo pip install pyinstaller tabulate`
| Fedora | `sudo pip install pyinstaller tabulate`
| Arch Linux | `pip install pyinstaller tabulate`

@note If some of the instructions above is incomplete or inaccurate for your system's version, please [get in touch](mailto:allan.leal@erdw.ethz.ch).

# Compiling the C++ library {#compiling-the-cpp-library}
Here we show how to compile only the C++ part of Reaktoro. Its Python interface is an optional component of the project, and its compilation and installation is shown in the [next section](#compiling-the-python-interface).

Once CMake has been installed, go inside the directory of the downloaded Reaktoro source code. In the terminal, execute the following commands for an out-of-source build approach:

~~~{.txt}
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ..
make
~~~

The commands above create a directory called `build`, where all files generated by CMake during the compilation will be saved. The command `cmake ..` tells CMake to configure the build process based on the main `CMakeLists.txt` file in the root directory of Reaktoro's source code. Finally, `make` compiles Reaktoro's source code.

Your system might have several threads that could be used for parallel compilation. To use three threads in a dual-core processor, use instead `make -j3`. To use all available threads in your processor, execute `make -j`.

@warning Be careful, as the use of all available threads when compiling Reaktoro can freeze your machine! Leaving one thread idle can avoid this.

For a global installation of the compiled libraries in your system, execute:

~~~{.txt}
make install
~~~

This will install Reaktoro's header files and libraries in the default installation directory of your system (e.g, `/usr/local/` or `/opt/local/`). Note that this installation mode might require administrator rights, so that you would need to execute `sudo make install` instead.

For a local installation, you can specify a directory path for the installed files as:

~~~{.txt}
cmake .. -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=/home/username/local/
make install
~~~

The above call to `cmake` will reconfigure the build process, but it will not require recompilation if Reaktoro's libraries have already been compiled.

# Compiling the Python interface {#compiling-the-python-interface}
Most C++ classes and methods in Reaktoro are accessible from Python. To use its Python interface, Python wrappers to these C++ components must be compiled. These wrappers are generated using [Boost.Python], so ensure your system has Boost installed. Read [here](#installing-the-dependencies) for instructions.

To build the Python wrappers, the CMake option `-DBUILD_PYTHON=ON` must be provided to the CMake command that configures the build process:

~~~{.txt}
cmake .. -DBUILD_PYTHON=ON
~~~

@note If you have already compiled the C++ libraries, this will cause them to be recompiled. Thus, if you plan to build both C++ libraries and Python wrappers, it is advised to use the `-DBUILD_PYTHON=ON` option before the first call to `make`.

After compilation, you should find the shared library `PyReaktoro` inside the directory `lib` in the build directory. This library is also a Python module, which can be imported from Python as:

~~~{.txt}
from reaktoro import *
~~~

# Compiling the C++ demos
There are several demos of how to use Reaktoro in the directory `demos` inside the root directory of Reaktoro's source code. To build these demos, you can either execute:

~~~{.txt}
make demos
~~~

or use the cmake option `-DBUILD_DEMOS=ON` as in:

~~~{.txt}
cmake .. -DBUILD_DEMOS=ON
~~~

to automatically build the demos with a call to `make`. Once the demos are compiled, they can be found in the directory `bin` of the build directory. To run them from the terminal in a Unix system, go to the `bin` directory and execute:

~~~{.txt}
./demo-equilibrium-co2-brine
~~~

where `demo-equilibrium-co2-brine` is the name of a demo application in the `bin` directory.

[Boost.Python]: http://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_64_0/libs/python/doc/html/index.html